In the beginning, the internet was a
miracle, a digital wild west where
information, money, knowledge, and
culture could flow around the world with
no limits. It promised us a future where
technology would set humanity free. It
promised a future where power would
belong to the individual. But somewhere
along the way, that dream was corrupted.
As the internet grew to become
ubiquitous, the open frontier closed and
the dream of freedom became a nightmare
of surveillance, consumerism,
advertising, and control. The Trump
administration has tapped Palunteer, the
data mining company, to compile data on
people in the United States for a master
database.
>> The same technology that we had hoped
would liberate us began dividing,
manipulating, and watching on a scale
that was previously unimaginable.
>> We power ICE. We power efforts to defend
America and Ukraine. We've supported
Israel. I don't know all the efforts
we're involved in, but I and most
Palunteerians are very proud of this. As
the world drives off a cliff faster than
we can react with crisis after crisis,
increasingly violent politics, polarized
culture, and a general sense that life
is getting worse for almost everybody.
>> The government shutdown hitting one
month this morning, leaving nearly 42
million Americans who rely on food
benefits without enough to eat.
>> Trillion dollar tech companies fly past
previously impossible milestones.
>> Elon Musk has officially become the
richest person in the world. It feels
like myself and everybody I know is
asking ourselves, how did this happen?
And what are we supposed to do? But
there's one person in particular who saw
it all coming. After he helped create
revolutionary technology at the peak of
the Silicon Valley boom, Peter Thiel
would come to see democracy and humanity
not as sacred, but as obstacles that he
would have to destroy along the way to
becoming far more powerful. This is the
story of how the world got this way.
This is the story of the man who owns
it. This is the story of Peter Teal.
Peter Thiel was born in Germany, West
Germany at the time, in Frankfurt in
1967. But his childhood wasn't the
typical adolescent experience of a
European kid growing up in the 70s. The
official story that pops up everywhere
you look on the internet is simple.
Peter Teal's father was a chemical
engineer that relocated his family
between a couple of different countries
to further his career during the 60s and
the 70s. But that's only part of the
picture as we come to see how his family
would shape his worldview, his
ambitions, and his approach to power and
business. Because when you look at where
they relocated to, it becomes obvious
that there was a deeper ideology behind
their moves. Because West Germany in the
late 1960s was finally rich, stable, and
comfortable after embracing capitalism,
democracy, and progress following the
chaos and destruction of World War II.
Not only were they growing faster than
East Germany, but they had one of the
strongest economies in Europe overall.
>> Tower of radioree Berlin. The view from
the top is a favorite of Willie Brandt.
From up here, he can see the ultramodern
congress hall. he hopes will one day
house an all German parliament.
>> And on the surface they had it all
together. But behind the scenes, things
were falling apart existentially.
Basically, even while they were trying
to move on from their tragically
bloodstained past, there were still
former Nazis sitting in government
positions, teaching in universities, and
running corporations all over the
country. And the younger generation who
were born after the war were waking up
to that reality with shame and disgust,
feeling that older Germans were content
to avoid the truth by ignoring the nasty
past. The scenes of violence in Berlin
streets were ugly. They were echoed in
other German cities as the students
grouped into menacing armies. One of
their aims was to stop the distribution
of all Springer newspapers. Force was
met with force. More than politics or
economics, it was a fight about what
kind of country Germany would be in the
future. Would they ignore their Nazi
history and let it continue to exist
under the surface, or would they walk
away from it for good? and unrest became
outrage after a 26-year-old university
student was shot in the back of the head
by police during a protest. And so
within a year, there would be a variety
of demonstrations around the country
that ultimately changed German culture
forever. Countless professors,
administrators, and politicians with
Nazi past were pushed out of power. And
in the end, the idea of never again
became central to Germany's new identity
as the next generation chose to follow a
more modern progressive path. But the
Teal family were not progressives. His
father, Klaus Friedrich Thiel, was born
in Germany in 1938, meaning that Peter
Teal's grandparents were adults during
the Nazi party's rise to power, and his
family did not embrace the liberal wave
of post-war Europe. Their answer to
these problems would be to leave Germany
forever.
After a year spent in Cleveland, they
would then move to Southwest Africa, a
South African territory that later
became the country of Namibia, where
Klaus Teal would help manage the
development of the Rosing uranium mine.
The roasting mine is one of the mines
that was used in South Africa's illegal
weapons operation that sold the
ingredients for nuclear weapons to
countries like France, Israel, and China
during a time when the international
community was pushing hard to limit
nuclear proliferation. But more
important than the mine was the town
itself. The Teals would stay in
Swagment, a town of 25,000 people that
sits between the Atlantic Ocean and the
vast Namib Desert. Not only were they
living in South Africa during the
violent era of apartheid, but despite
its small size and isolated location,
the town of Swakottman itself was
significant for many post-war Germans.
And that's because it was one of the few
places that ex-Nazis weren't just
welcome, but were even celebrated.
Swakottman was settled in 1892 as the
main harbor for German southwest Africa,
a colony that Germany controlled for
just a few short decades before losing
it during World War I. Although it would
remain a culturally German beach resort
town. mainly because the southwest NIP
desert was impossibly far away from the
rest of the world. Surrounded by nothing
but oceans of sand and two centuries
worth of shipwrecks. And it was in this
isolated backwater environment that
former Nazis felt free to be themselves
and not as a quiet minority or a fringe
community. The story goes that in
Swagotund it was common to greet others
with Hy Hitler. A 1970s New York Times
article would describe the town as more
German than Germany, with streets named
in German and main street shops
dedicated entirely to goods imported
from Germany. Even as late as 1989, the
Nazi flag was flown from the tallest
building in the town to mark the 100th
anniversary of Hitler's birthday. And
that's where Peter Thiel and his family
lived until he was 11 years old. After a
decade, when the mine was finished, the
Teals would move back to the US where
they would settle in the Bay Area of
California in a suburb south of San
Francisco.
Peter Thiel's biographer paints his
childhood in California as full of
contradictions. During classmate
interviews, former friends would call
him joyless and vain at the same time.
Because as a young teen, he was very
much the archetypical 1980s nerd. If
nothing else brought him happiness,
Peter Teal was downright obsessed with
science fiction and fantasy, reading The
Lord of the Rings over 10 times and
naming Isaac Azimov as another favorite
author. Naturally, Dungeons and Dragons
was his favorite game to play, where he
would often take the role of dungeon
master, the director that controls the
game's reality for other players. But
despite that, he would quote, "Never
hide that he was intelligent." At 12
years old, he was one of the highest
ranked young chess players in all of
California, putting a sticker on his
chess set that said, "Born to win."
Although in reality, he was known for
losing his cool and getting angry when
he did lose. But growing up in the 80s,
he faced a lot of bullying for these
interests. And by the time he entered
the second half of high school, his
classmates would notice that the
bullying he had gone through didn't
really affect him much as his
awkwardness became outright arrogance.
One of his friends would later say Peter
never tried to hide the fact that he was
the smartest guy in the room. One story
comes from his senior year where even
after being accepted into Stanford, one
of the top universities in the country,
Teal risked his entire college career by
taking the SAT for underassmen for $500
each. a side hustle that while lucrative
could have also had him thrown out of
college before he even got there. But
anecdotes about Peter Teal's personality
would only get stranger as he started
college at Stamford University and his
own unique worldview and ambitions began
to take shape after a deeply
unconventional childhood.
Upon being accepted into Stanford
University, Peter Thiel didn't follow
the trend of going into computer science
that was soon going to turn the entire
Bay Area into the worldwide center of
the technology boom. Instead, he chose
to pursue a degree in philosophy. But it
wasn't the education itself that would
define his time at Stanford. Instead, we
can look at it as the place where Peter
Thiel's deep, lifelong relationship to
politics and technology began. He's this
kid that was raised in severely
conservative German South Africa. And
then he arrives at this
progressiveleaning university in
Northern California after being raised
by a father who was willing to move
continents a halfozen times to avoid
liberalism in a childhood spent in a
town that practically worshiped Nazis.
And now he's walking right into the
epicenter of 1980s progressivism. And
the students at his school were some of
the most empathetic, bleeding heart,
politically extreme group of kids in
modern history. But instead of being
swept up into the rising tide of
progressivism, Peter Thiel would find
himself deeply at odds with the world
around him, he would lean into his
upbringing and heritage, doubling down
and turning ideological confrontation
into a cornerstone of who he was in a
way that would last for the rest of his
life.
Laws made white people officially
superior and the large black majority
faced discrimination in every aspect of
their lives. Living, doing business, or
owning land in white areas was banned.
There were separate public facilities,
transport, and schools. Interracial
marriage was banned. Many had no right
to citizenship and were regarded as
aliens in major cities. In the mid to
late 1980s, the state of politics in
South Africa was becoming a central
concern on college campuses around the
US. Increased media attention had
created a level of student outrage that
hadn't been seen since the Vietnam War,
putting the spotlight on the
institutionalized racial segregation,
violence against black citizens, and
massive economic inequality.
>> When conflict erupted in the 1980s with
anti-aparted activists frequently shot
at, beaten or arrested,
>> students held protests on campus all
over the country in an attempt to compel
institutions to stop doing business with
South African companies for as long as
the crimes against humanity continued.
Protest leaders would declare, "We don't
want our education financed by the blood
of the South African people." At
Colombia in New York, hundreds of
students and even some professors would
blockade an academic building for over 3
weeks before the university finally cut
all ties from South African companies.
Stanford itself was particularly
consequential. Over a thousand students
would sit in at Stanford alone, and in
the end, the university's administrators
would threaten to sell off enough stock
in Motorola that the company agreed to
cease sales of electronics to South
African military forces. In the same way
that students had shifted national
consciousness in West Germany 20some
years earlier, now American students
were turning apartheid from something
distant and easy to ignore into a moral
crisis that forced universities and
companies to face the truth. And in the
end, their protesting meaningfully
contributed to the country's government
eventually being sanctioned by the
Reagan administration, which itself
ended up being a huge turning point
against the South African regime. Both
the government and its opponents should
begin a dialogue about constructing a
political system that rests upon the
consent of the governed where the rights
of majorities and minorities and
individuals are protected by law. It was
here that Peter Teal stood as a college
student having just begun his education
at one of the most progressive and
outspoken schools in the country at a
time when nearly everybody was united in
drawing attention to a gross injustice
happening across the world. But that
gross injustice just happened to be the
one that he spent his childhood not just
benefiting from but celebrating.
And so in the company of his peers,
Peter Thiel would become known for
openly dismissing the anti-aparid
movement as overblown. During
conversations with his fellow students,
he would say that apartheid works,
defending it as a good economic system,
which ended up earning him various
accusations of ignorance, arrogance, or
just plain racism. But after his ideas
were outright rejected by the people
around him, he wouldn't stop there. In
fact, 20-year-old Peter Thiel would only
double down and embark on the journey
that would define the rest of his life,
beginning a career full of what I would
call ideological entrepreneurialism. And
so, in 1987, when Peter Thiel was in his
second year of Stanford's philosophy
program, he co-founded a student
publication called the Stanford Review.
And the paper had one goal, to advocate
for conservative ideas at his famously
liberal university. But it wasn't just
inspired by political debates between
himself and the other undergraduates. In
the late 80s, Stamford was going through
a serious period of change. Looking to
modernize their approach to the
humanities, they replaced a western
culture course with a program called
culture, ideas, and values that quote
focused on diversity and
multiculturalism. It was also mandated
that the new program would include more
works by women or non-white authors and
that professors should be non-white as
well. And so in response, Teal's paper
presented itself as an objective forum
for rational debate, claiming to present
alternative views on a wide range of
current issues in the Stanford
community. And in one early edition of
the paper, we can see this immensely
revealing mission statement. Whenever
debates do take place within the
Stanford community, they're too often
confined to an emotional level. Name
calling like, "That's racist, he's a
communist, you're a fascist," is the
norm, even though it rarely leads
anywhere. In the Stanford Review, we
will confine ourselves to rational
argumentation, which will hopefully lead
to rational thought and rational
solutions. The emotional type of debate,
on the other hand, has had a dismal
track record of polarizing views and
provoking irresponsible solutions. With
this paper coming all the way from the
late '8s, almost 40 years ago, it's
almost shocking how it feels like it was
written at the height of today's culture
wars. Politically correct versus
politically incorrect, rights versus
libtards. Basically, it was the highbrow
version of a Ben Shapiro debate
compilation. But it's important to
remember that it went even deeper than
Peter Teal disagreeing with liberalism
or being an arrogant undergrad. These
grievances he laid out in the paper were
personal. While he may have written that
it was all for the sake of debating and
considering all viewpoints and being
rational, in reality, Peter Thiel very
much knew what side of the debate he was
on. It's the same tactic that's used by
a lot of the debate personalities around
today. Acting like your position comes
from a desire to advocate for
ideological diversity and rationality
and free speech. That can be a powerful
tool to give the feeling of neutrality
to what is in reality a very very biased
position. When you read excerpts from
Peter Thiel's writing at the time, you
know exactly what I'm talking about.
It's very very recognizable to the same
type of debate tactics that people use
today. The reason we have racial
tensions in our society, the reason we
have other kinds of tensions is not
because there is a problem with racism
and other forms of oppression, but
because people are looking for these
things too much.
>> And so by founding his own paper, one
that would go against the grain of
everyone around him, he was able to
build his own stage instead of being
forced to conform to the dominant campus
culture at the time. But for Peter Teal,
instead of just coming out of a desire
to be contrarian to those he didn't
align with, his disagreements were true
to him. And that's because he grew up in
South Africa in a culture that was
essentially outside of the Western
world. Thousands of miles away from
Europe or North America, sandwiched
between the barren desert and the vast
ocean. Progress or neoliberalism was not
a concern for the people of Swakotmund.
Peter Thiel's family raised him on an
island of extreme conservatism where you
could openly praise Hitler and celebrate
racial oppression with no push back
whatsoever. His contrarianism wasn't
uninformed. It was in fact a reflection
of his entire life so far. It just so
happened that his writings were also a
great early glimpse into the culture war
that would later escape college campuses
and define American social politics for
the last decade and a half. After
graduating from Stamford Law School in
the early 90s, Peter Thiel spent a
couple of years rapidly hopping between
jobs around the world. By the time he
had turned 30, he had been a clerk for a
federal judge in Alabama, a securities
lawyer at a multi-billion dollar firm in
New York City. He was then hired as a
trader at a bank in Switzerland. In the
middle of all of that, he picked up
experience writing speeches at the
office of Reagan era education secretary
William Bennett. And while all of these
were highly qualified jobs, they weren't
exactly notable. And with Teal not
staying at any of them for more than a
year, I'm guessing he probably knew
that. And so at the age of 29 in 1996,
Peter Teal goes back to California. But
this time he had a plan because he was
walking right into one of the most
explosive moments in the history of
business. The birth of the internet
economy.
And by the time Teal had returned home
in the late '90s, the Bay Area had
become something entirely new. Startup
culture was taking over as tech giants
popped up out of nowhere. Venture
capital was raising billions,
millionaires were made overnight, and
there was a general sense that just
about everything in the world could be
remade on the internet if you moved fast
enough. And Northern California had
become the center of this new digital
frontier.
>> An enormous amount of venture capital
pouring into Silicon Valley. I mean, in
the tens of billions of dollars was
being poured in and frankly being
distributed to anybody who could, you
know, raise their hand and say, "Yes, I
think I have a clever business idea."
>> There was a part of me during the com
boom that was going,
"This seems really stupid, but it seems
to be working. I mean, these guys are
making a lot of money somehow.
uh maybe I just don't get it right.
>> And so when he got back to California,
he found Teal Capital Management,
raising around $1 million with help from
friends and family, which should
probably raise your eyebrow. And he
turns it into his own little
self-directed venture capital fund to
capitalize on the internet economy boom.
But again, he was a philosophy student
with a law degree. He didn't study
business. He didn't study computer
science. And so his plan to capitalize
on the internet economy was to create
his own vehicle to invest into other
people's ideas and hopefully turn a
profit in a time when it seemed like
just about anybody could start their own
online company.
>> One was turning into millionaires
overnight uh from stock options and um
IPOs and uh it was just you know it's
kind of enticing when you're you know
you're fresh out of college and you see
all that stuff and all the magazines and
everything you're just like that's the
place I need to go. But after a major
investment into a friend's online
calendar project collapsed almost
immediately, Teal was back at square
one. But instead of going back to a
career in law that it seemed like he was
never particularly interested in to
begin with, Peter Teal started building
his own company with no idea that it
would do far more than just make him
rich, but actually fundamentally change
how the world uses money.
But first, he went through even more
failure. With the same set of friends
from the last company, Peter Teal
co-founded Confinity, a company with an
initial product that was convoluted and
not really that relevant even back then.
Basically, their software allowed users
to send money between Palm Pilot
devices, pocketsized touchscreen
computers that were popular at the time
and could be used to take notes, save
contact info and calendar events, and
other administrative tasks. And being
able to beam money between these devices
was an interesting concept, but in
practice, it was somewhat of an awkward
failure. Palm Pilots, while popular with
a techy yuppy crowd, weren't really
widely adopted by ordinary people. There
were only around 5 million devices in
circulation at the time, and that was a
pretty low ceiling on how popular
something like PayPal could become. On
top of that, though, it was pretty
clunky. Early team members would later
say that as far as actually using the
app was concerned, no one could really
think of anything to do with it besides
splitting the tab after dinner.
>> When we started PayPal, uh the initial
product was a uh was an uh infrared
beaming device on Palm Pilots for
sending money. It was voted one of the
10 worst business ideas in 1999. And
1999 was a year where there were many
bad ideas in technology.
>> But they would quickly realized that
despite their lack of success, they had
unintentionally built technology that
could be easily applied elsewhere. In
the mid to late '90s, being able to
conveniently and safely make online
purchases was extremely difficult. If
you wanted to buy something on the
computer, you would either write a check
and mail it, which could take weeks to
clear and was subject to fraud on both
sides. It was an option to type your
credit card information directly into an
unsecured form on a merchant's website,
but you'd have to trust they wouldn't
overcharge you or just end up stealing
it. Or you could use software like
Cybercash or E-old, which were
incredibly primitive and hard to get
into for most users. Essentially, there
was no real way for ordinary people to
make online purchases, even while
websites like eBay and Amazon were
becoming incredibly popular. And this
lack of convenience was a huge barrier
towards further growth. Sending money
orders in the mail to buy something on
Amazon wasn't going to work anymore if
the internet wanted to see widespread
adoption. It was going to have to be
easy, convenient, and safe. And so,
Peter Teal and his team set out to apply
their Palm Pilot technology then called
PayPal to the entire internet. Along the
way, they would merge with Elon Musk's
X.com, a popular online banking and
money transfer app. And they would
combine technologies, creating one
website where anyone in the world with
an email address and access to a
computer could send or receive money
online. And even though they launched
right before the collapse, the dot
bubble that was so bad it took the
American stock market years to recover
from.
>> After what they are already calling
Black Friday, they are counting up the
damage on Wall Street. In the spring of
2000, the stampede reversed
>> and sent the Dow and the NASDAQ
plummeting. It was the worst single day
point loss ever for both exchanges.
>> Some person or some groups of people,
and I think it was mainly the large
institutional investors, stood up and
said, "No, I'm not putting another $100
million in this company because you've
not made any progress to getting
profitable."
>> PayPal only kept growing with a viral
marketing trick where they would offer
$10 for every new user to try out the
service. They went from tens of
thousands to hundreds of thousands to
millions of users in just 18 months.
They had, against all odds, become one
of the fastest growing online companies
with almost 200 employees and $100
million in revenue. Even the press
couldn't deny that their success was
exceptional. They would write, "Ecarnies
have rarely been worth a paper that
they're not printed on, but with a
potent viral marketing gimmick and a
dose of dumb luck, PayPal is making
person-toperson transactions pay." And
so in 2002, they were ultimately
acquired by eBay, one of their biggest
partners for whom they had made online
checkouts possible for $1.5 billion. But
the story goes that many of PayPal's
original founding employees had a hard
time adjusting to the more traditional
corporate culture at their new parent
company. And it would only be one or two
years before almost every single one of
them had walked away. Although that
wasn't the end of the story, because the
team that had built PayPal would go on
to have possibly the most wide-ranging
collective success story in the history
of Silicon Valley. Max Levchin, one of
PayPal's co-founders, would found a
firm, the company that initially
popularized buy now pay later services
online. Elon Musk obviously became the
wealthiest man on Earth. Reed Hoffman,
PayPal's former executive vice
president, would found LinkedIn. Several
former PayPal engineers and designers
would form the team that founded YouTube
and sold it to Google for billions of
dollars. Another software developer from
PayPal would co-ound Yelp. Another one
would later work as the CEO of Reddit.
And that's only a few examples.
Basically the percentage of early PayPal
employees that would later become highly
influential serial entrepreneurs was
high
>> and part of what was interesting in
these companies was that uh the
diversity of all of them that like none
of the content is exactly the same. If
you look at this LinkedIn is about kind
of professional networking, YouTube is
about video, Tesla electronic cars,
SpaceX launch of spaceships, Yammer
which is u business communication
>> and their success rate was even higher.
Some of the biggest internet companies
around today came out of this one small
group.
>> This is PayPal today uh which is a uh
global company. It's what a unicorn uh
before the term unicorn and it is
spinning out of eBay later this year. Uh
but the more interesting story is about
what is called the PayPal mafia which is
the group of people behind this and more
value was created uh after the um uh
essentially after uh PayPal than was in
the initial period. And so
>> Peter Teal wouldn't found any other
companies at all because tech itself
wasn't the full story of what he was
trying to do.
Even in early interviews during their
first initial growth spurt, he would
speak candidly with journalists about
how he envisioned PayPal's political
purpose. Teal believes his company could
ultimately compete with titans like
American Express. But the prize he has
in mind is bigger than a place in the
DAO. He hopes to make PayPal a vehicle
of geopolitical liberation. The ability
to move money fluidly and the erosion of
the nation state are closely related, he
explains. With a PayPal account, anyone
on the internet can transfer value with
greater anonymity than they could with a
Swiss bank account. hard to tax, harder
to regulate, and nearly impossible to
control. In other words, PayPal was
crypto before crypto existed. A
libertarian dream of money without
government oversight.
>> And that's the kind of choice
governments like China, India, some of
these other countries are going to face.
They will either have to shut down the
telecommunications network and make it
illegal for you to own a cell phone or
they will have to basically uh give up
the kind of monetary sovereignty they've
had and the enormous power that they've
been able to wield as a result of this
kind of sovereignty over the last uh
many many years.
>> And so by all accounts, Peter Teal had
not set out to be a CEO. Everything he
had worked on to that point. Even his
billion-dollar tech company had been
ideologically motivated. And so instead
of going off to found another tech
company and chase after the next
billion-dollar product like all of his
friends from PayPal had, Peter Teal
would instead double down on what he
believed in and go in a completely
different direction, seeking to build a
new level of influence and control
bigger than any widget or app that he
could help develop. PayPal was a
revolutionary product, one of the
biggest tech companies of its entire
generation. And it wasn't just that they
had gotten lucky during a moment of
growth in tech. They had legitimately
revolutionized the use of money online.
But on Peter Teal's resume, it was an
outlier. He was a philosophy student who
ran a paper at school. He was into
politics and debates, culture wars, and
his work experience was as a lawyer,
developing software, managing a huge
team, being the figurehead of a tech
company, that never really seemed like
it was part of his plan. So even in a
moment where the entire world would have
jumped to invest in Peter Teal's
companies, he simply walks away. But he
didn't disappear. Instead, he was
actually going to go bigger, focusing
his energy on bringing his philosophies
to life across the entire tech industry.
In the early to mid 2000s, Peter Thiel
founded a long list of venture capital
firms. Clarium Capital was first, a
hedge fund that he founded almost
immediately after PayPal was sold. And
while it was successful, his investing
career didn't really kick off until he
became the first outside investor in
Facebook, buying 10% of the company for
$500,000 in 2004, at a time when the
platform had less than a h 100,000
users. Then the year after that, while
his shares in Facebook were well on
their way to being worth tens of
millions of dollars, he opens Founders
Fund, a venture capital firm that would
quickly reach a portfolio worth $20
billion by making early investments in
SpaceX, Airbnb, DeepMind, Spotify,
Stripe, Neurolink, OpenAI, Figma, Affirm
Poly Market, Credit Karma, Lyft, Wish,
and many other massive companies. In
2008, he would invest in the Seasteading
Institute, a company founded by Milton
Freriedman's grandson that aimed to
create permanent autonomous ocean cities
that could exist without interference
from any government entity. In 2011, he
founded Breakout Ventures, another VC
firm, this time for the purpose of
investing in biotechnology.
And ultimately, almost all of Peter
Teal's investments pointed towards one
vision of what technology could do for
civilization. expanding freedom, putting
power in the hands of people, connecting
the world beyond the barriers of banks,
languages, government, and nationality.
As the first investor in Facebook, he
helped build a platform that wasn't just
a social network, but a digital
ecosystem that redefined how humanity
could communicate and do business across
the world. And then being the first
institutional investor in SpaceX, he
showed that ambitious space exploration,
which was once the exclusive domain of
entire governments, could be achieved
through private enterprise and
entrepreneurial vision. Even more of his
investments, companies like Airbnb,
Spotify, and they were at their core
telling a story of decentralizing things
like hotels, the music industry, taxis.
He was dissolving old institutions into
digital platforms and creating freedom
by allowing direct digital connections.
And again, this was at its core who
Peter Thiel had always been. He starts
out as a student of philosophy, someone
obsessed with ideas and debates. His
college project wasn't an app or a
device or a website. It was a newspaper.
And so, in a time when technology was
becoming the new frontier of humanity,
Peter Teal became the philosopher king.
Someone who never stopped asking how do
we innovate faster and build towards a
better future as quickly as possible.
>> Companies, you know, you're trying to do
things with self-driving cars and
supposedly with asteroid mining,
although maybe that's just part of the
propaganda ministry. Um, and you know,
but but and you're doing more than
Microsoft or Apple or you know, a lot of
these other companies. Amazon's the only
one in my mind of the big tech companies
that's actually reinvesting all its
money that has enough of a vision of the
future that they're actually able to
reinvest all their profits.
>> They make less profit than Google does.
But if if we're living in an
accelerating technological world and you
have 0% interest rates in the
background, you should be able to invest
all of your money in um in uh in things
that will return it many times over. And
the fact that you're out of ideas, maybe
it's a political problem. The
government's outlawed things, but uh
it's uh
>> but even though Peter Teal had built
this crazy reputation as the libertarian
technology philosopher building a more
free future through the internet,
something completely different was
forming underneath his idealism. because
despite everything he seemed to be
trying to create, it would quickly
become apparent that what he had
actually made was something else
entirely.
On September 11, 2001, the world changed
forever when al-Qaeda flew two Boeing
767s into the World Trade Center,
killing almost 3,000 people in the
deadliest terror attack in history.
>> The rest of the world hears you. And the
people
and the people these buildings down.
We'll hear all of us soon.
>> For people who are old enough to
remember, they talk about airport
checkpoints getting stricter and the
general mood of the era. But more than
that, it was a moment of fundamental
change. The government put together the
Department of Homeland Security. They
passed the Patriot Act. It was the dawn
of mass surveillance build security.
Because the problem wasn't that they had
no idea the attacks were coming.
Instead, the legacy of America's
response to 9/11 was one of
uncoordinated incompetence. Prior to the
attacks, multiple hijackers who were
involved in 9/11 were known to the CIA,
but were never placed on any watch list.
Even five or six years before 9/11
happened, intelligence agencies knew
that terrorists had plans to use
airplanes as weapons, but had never
specifically planned on how to prevent
that happening. Basically, the fact that
9/11 happened at all was a deep
institutional failure. And Americans
knew this. But one thing that Peter Teal
had always been good at was spotting
opportunities. And what he would realize
was that the threat of terrorism in
America connected directly to what he
and his team had built at PayPal.
Because really, for the first time ever,
it was a tech startup processing oceans
of data from all over the world. I mean,
more than any one bank, more than any
group individually, PayPal could see
everything that anyone was doing on
their platform. And at the same time, as
they grew naturally, they had to start
preventing financial crimes and fraud on
the platform. To do that, they had to
build highly sophisticated algorithms
that could reach far and wide and detect
patterns to prevent fraud. And so when
the whole country realizes that 911
probably could have been prevented,
Peter Teal realizes that he may have
already built the tech to do it.
Teal brings in Alex Karp to lead the
company as CEO, another non-technical
philosopher who had degrees in social
theory and worked in tech adjacent
fields. and he would later say about
their early years, "We couldn't for the
life of us get any venture capitalist in
California to invest in Palunteer." The
story goes that Michael Morates, the
head of gigantic venture capital firm
Sequoia, would doodle through an entire
meeting, and one of his colleagues would
lecture the Palunteer team about how the
company was undoubtedly going to fail.
Eventually, Peter Teal himself had to
put $30 million of his own money in to
get Palanteer off the ground. But even
years later, after they had been
developing the product for six or seven
years, journalists in the early 2010s
would still write that no one seemed to
know what exactly Palanteer does. And so
it remained as this kind of quiet
project in the background, while Peter
Teal's much more prolific investing
career brought him into the upper
echelon of Silicon Valley.
By 2012, the company's revenue had
passed $300 million, and Peter Thiel
would go on record saying that one day
soon, Palunteer will be as big as
Facebook. But still, people didn't
exactly know what the company did. In
2015, right around the time that their
valuation was about to pass $20 billion
in total, TechCrunch published a leaked
report that actually gave the public the
first big insight into what Palunteer
really was. Basically, they parse data
for huge organizations. like an
organization so big that they have
pabytes of information and such a wide
range of different kinds of data that
there's basically no way for one team or
one person to make sense of all of it.
Essentially, Palunteer is a solution
that makes it extremely easy to search
for, visualize, and process huge amounts
of information. For example, Palunteer
helped the SEC convict Bernie Mattov,
the New York banker, whose Ponzi scheme
was worth almost $70 billion in the late
2000s by making it easy for them to
search through 40 years of records and
over 20 terabytes of data to build a
case against him.
>> Bernie Maidoff said he had no excuses
before a federal judge sentenced him to
150 years for masterminding the biggest
Ponzi scheme in world history. Palunteer
explains that it's a tool set for use in
human analysis on its website. And we
now understand that the service is
pretty much a smarter way of displaying
data for analysis by humans. It's
capable of building comprehensive models
of activity to detect suspicious
anomalies, and it's even able to provide
immunity to fraud thanks to strategies
the founders learned while still at
PayPal. Palanteer's anti-fraud system
uses algorithms to detect and isolate
patterns designated by analysts. This
approach was inspired by the need to
combat adaptive threats at PayPal. At
the same time, though, that wasn't all
it could be used for. One of their big
clients was the LAPD, who was using
Palanteer as a tool for predictive
policing, um, using the software to
track and connect potential suspects all
around the city and helping police
officers prioritize which neighborhoods
to patrol more than others. Starting in
2012, it was also used by the New
Orleans Police Department, who secretly
relied on Palunteer to map gang networks
and predict who might commit violence
before it happened. The program scraped
arrest records, social media, and police
reports to flag specific individual
residents of the city as higher risk.
But at the same time, lawyers would
later argue that criminal defendant
rights had been violated by keeping the
use of such software a secret from the
community. Samuel reading, former marine
who works in Afghanistan for the NEK
Advanced Securities Group, was quoted in
a document as saying that Palunteer is
the combination of every analytical tool
that could ever exist. He said, "You
will know every single bad guy in your
area. Even New York City's police
department secretly licensed Palunteer
for years, using it to connect arrest
records, license plate data, and other
information to connect crimes and
people. TechCrunch's article also
revealed that as of 2013, Palanteer was
in use by at least 12 groups within the
US government, including the CIA, the
NSA, the FBI, every three-letter agency
you could think of, was using their
software to turn oceans of data into
easily digestible information that made
spying and law enforcement easier and
more accurate. It all sounds like
something that would horrify Peter Teal.
But Peter Thiel was no longer the same
person he used to be. And we can see the
exact moment he changed. In the early
2000s, Peter Thiel wrote an essay called
the Straussian moment as a holistic
overview of his general perspectives
right around the time when Palunteer was
starting to get its first big contracts
and the world in general was changing
fundamentally with regards to almost
everything economically, militarily, for
better or for worse. This was a pretty
important moment. And what he wrote was
that America's constitutional system,
the rules of our democracy itself, have
become a barrier to progress, saying
that the checks and balances meant to
protect freedom now prevent any direct
path forward. And so in this moment of
instability, terror attacks, and wars,
instead of reforming the system, Peter
Thiel proposes something far darker,
replacing it. He wrote that instead of
the United Nations filled with
interminable and inconclusive
parliamentary debates that resemble
Shakespearean tales told by idiots, we
should consider echelon, the secret
coordination of the world's intelligence
services as the decisive path to a truly
global pax americana. Basically, Peter
Thiel is saying that democracy is too
inefficient to save civilization from
the existential threats outside and that
real order and progress will have to
come from a new kind of power, a power
that operates outside the restrictions
of government. And so for him, the
future didn't look libertarian or even
democratic at all. It's technocratic,
elite, and hidden. A world ruled not by
votes, but by data, surveillance, and
the people who control it. And judging
by what he was doing with Palunteer and
the way that it was a very clear
contradiction compared to the rest of
his career up till this point, it seems
pretty clear that Peter Teal's idea of
what the world should look like had
changed fundamentally. And so the
Straussian moment wasn't just an essay.
It was a road map. The same way that he
had invested in tech with a
philosophical point of view in the years
prior, now he was going to do the same,
but with a fundamentally different
vision than before. With Palanteer,
Peter Teal wasn't just imagining a world
of surveillance and power. He was
building it. And what happened next was
going to solidify nearly every idea he
had already been playing around with in
his head. But he also wasn't alone.
Peter Teal wasn't the only person who
saw new opportunities and ideas taking
shape. As the age of surveillance dawned
in the 2000s, and the world pretty
clearly changed forever, a small but
influential movement was quickly gaining
clout on the internet with a series of
ideas that attempted to explain a
possibly more effective replacement for
not just libertarianism, but American
democracy in general. In their
post-lbertarian vision, freedom was no
longer the goal of all goals. In fact,
it would be almost the exact opposite.
It all starts with Curtis Yarvin. Just a
couple years younger than Teal, he
graduated from Brown University in 1992
and began a career in software
development in Silicon Valley shortly
after that. But in 2007, he began
publishing essays on a personal blog
under the anonymous name Menchius
Moldbug, laying out a political
philosophy called formalism that he saw
as a potential replacement for all of
the failings of the neoliberal order
that dominates the Western world.
Yarvin's writings relentlessly
criticized liberal democracy,
egalitarianism, and the notion of
progress in general as detrimental to
the advancement of society. He felt that
civilization was being run into the
ground by an amalgamation of
universities and media companies called
the cathedral, who constantly preach a
meaningless message of progress to the
public while society decays over time.
He described democracy as chaos and
tyranny in the sense that if people
don't actually know what's for the
greater good and are being misled by the
media, they may actually vote against
meaningfully improving the world without
knowing. And so Yarvin would essentially
suggest that the values that had been
passed down since the founding of
America, individual liberty,
constitutional government, progress, and
human rights had run their course and
were no longer stable or useful.
Instead, he would suggest a political
system that combined corporatism with
medieval feudalism, where a country
could be run by a national CEO. A role
that he described as a tech genius king,
someone who had no limits on their
authority and could ensure maximum
growth and forward momentum for the
country.
>> A monarch, a single focus of authority
is, you know, absolutely necessary to
run any integrated system efficiently.
You could probably put any of the
Fortune 500 CEOs in and say, "Okay,
you're in charge of the executive
branch. fix this, they'd probably do
fine. They wouldn't be Hillary or
Stalin.
>> In a time plagued by economic
instability and seemingly endless war,
as Bush's neoliberal America
transitioned to Obama's neoliberal
America, Curtis Yarvin quickly built a
small but dedicated audience of
disaffected, unsatisfied libertarians,
technologists, and rationalists who all
felt similarly that politics was
crumbling under its own weight and a
better solution was necessary to push
towards the future. pretty far out in a
way that is worth thinking about.
>> There's this guy Curtis Yarvin who's
written um about some of these things.
>> Do I have Are there people I'm in the
administration who are on signal groups
with me? Yes, there are.
>> It only grew from there. Not everyone
necessarily agreed with his calling for
a total upending of civilization by
replacing the government with a king,
but there were a lot of people in the
tech subculture who agreed that there
was something wrong with the ineffective
neoliberal status quo. For years, Curtis
Yarvin had been writing online about
political theory and relative obscurity.
His ideas were pretty extreme, that
institutions at the heart of American
intellectual life, like the mainstream
media and academia, need to be
dissolved. He also believes that
government bureaucracy should be
radically gutted, and that American
democracy should be replaced by what he
calls a monarchy run by a CEO.
>> Monarch is good. It's a neutral term.
>> Then came Nick Land. Land had been known
as a provocative philosopher in the
1990s before disappearing into obscurity
in China while struggling with a drug
addiction. But in late 2012, he returned
with a series of essays called the dark
enlightenment, intending to build on
Curtis Yarvin's ideas a few years
earlier. He would talk even more about
the idea of capitalism as a basis for
society itself instead of the long-held
ideals like progress, liberty, or
humanism. Nick Land would also argue in
favor of authoritarian governance, which
he thought could provide greater
stability, order, and growth than modern
liberal democracy. Like Yarvin, he would
write that democracy was fundamentally
destined for tyranny, and that modern
progressive ideas had morphed into a
secular religion of its own, worshiped
by a howling, irrational mob of people
while politicians pander as society
races towards the bottom. His answer was
simple. Build an ultra capitalist
corporate medieval kingdom. Yes, an
ultra capitalist neofudal order. Nick
Land literally wrote that society needs
to return to the medieval era in an
ultra capitalist landscape ruled by an
advanced technology with corporate
principles. Curtis Yarvin envisioned it
and Nickland turned it into a serious
intellectual statement. But that wasn't
all they had in common. They were both
also racist. Curtis Yarvin had written
that certain races are more naturally
inclined towards slavery than others,
while Nick Land has written repeatedly
about the importance of racial
hierarchies.
>> Not necessarily believe then that
certain races would be better at
governing a country than others.
>> Oh, I mean um again, you know, governing
a country is just a skill. And you know,
it's like the the the British in India
would basically say, "Oh, this race is a
governing race. This race is not a
governing race based on culture, based
on tradition, based on certain races
would be better at running governments
than others.
>> Would be better at uh at doing anything.
But the one thing they didn't have was
someone to make their dark vision of the
future come true. And yeah, again, their
writing was offensive and extreme. But
it had come at a moment when extreme
ideas felt needed. After two wars,
financial crash that never ended, and
institutions lying straight to people's
faces, saying, "Tear it down and crown a
CEO" was at least worth thinking about.
To a lot of people, the Dark
Enlightenment provided a dramatic answer
to the disillusionment of the age,
arguing that the only way forward was
paradoxically to go back to older forms
of authority, albeit augmented by modern
technology and knowledge. And for Peter
Teal, after spending his whole career
trying to innovate technology that could
free the world, and now being frustrated
and disappointed at the direction that
politics, culture, and capitalism was
going, these blogs felt like something
designed in a lab to personally appeal
to him. Curtis Yarvin and Nick Lan had
created the perfect blueprint to give
Peter Teal's multi-billion dollar empire
of philosophical technology a brand new
purpose. He would become obsessed,
investing in Curtis Arvin software
projects and even writing his own essays
building on their ideas. And the way
that it manifested into his business
empire was more extreme than anything he
had done before. Because right after,
literally months after the Curtis
Yaranesque blog started gaining
traction, came the worst recession since
the Great Depression.
>> Collapse, the mortgages couldn't be paid
and the banks essentially became
insolvent.
>> The collapse of Bear Sterns was
catastrophic. It was a wakeup call to
Wall Street. That was a real tell in the
unfolding and the House of Cards coming
crumbling down.
>> Gigantic banks failed. Middle-class
families watched their savings vanish,
homes were lost, and jobs disappeared.
>> I think this is the most significant
financial crisis in the post-war period.
There are fears the sell-off will
continue on Wall Street.
>> Soaring gas prices, falling home prices,
and rising unemployment.
>> It was a moment that broke Peter Teal's
belief system when the world's biggest
free market, the thing that he believed
in more than anything, crashed and had
to be saved by the government. On the
second try, the House passes a sprawling
$700 billion government rescue of the
financial industry, sending it to the
president, who will sign it into law.
And yeah, if you're like me and you were
8 years old when this happened, you
might not remember how big of a deal
that was. But when researchers looked
back at 2008, they found that there were
more than 10,000 extra suicides than the
average should have been during the
height of the global financial crisis.
It was enough to make Peter Teal's
libertarian dreams die. But in Peter
Teal's eyes, the worst part of it all
was something else. The fact that the
government had used half a trillion
dollars of taxpayer money to bail out
the same banks that had caused the
problem in the first place. Some of the
largest lenders in America had made bad
loans, bundled them into securities that
were virtually worthless, insured them
with companies that couldn't stand
behind the insurance, and in the end,
the federal government had bailed them
out because we need these big banks to
keep the economy going. For Peter Teal,
he wasn't just upset about irresponsible
government spending. Instead, he was
questioning everything he had dedicated
his life to so far. For someone who
spent his whole life worrying about
innovation and technological progress,
this type of government action may as
well have been the end of the world. And
so in 2009, Teal writes a short essay
called The Education of a Libertarian,
where he says that in spite of all the
success he's experienced over the last
10 years building companies and
investing with a libertarian goal, he no
longer believes that his libertarian
beliefs are going to be of much
consequence at all. As an entrepreneur
and investor, I have focused my efforts
on the internet. In the late 1990s, the
founding vision of PayPal centered on
the creation of a new world currency
free from all government control. By
starting a new internet business, an
entrepreneur can create a new world. The
hope of the internet is that these new
worlds will impact and force change on
the existing social and political order.
And I'll be honest, I get where Peter
Teal was coming from at this point in
time. By the late 2000s or early 2010s,
the political order had become pretty
hollow. America was promised global
cooperation, endless growth, free
markets, but all we got was global
terror, endless war, and failing
markets. And neither political party had
a solid plan on what to do, if they
would even acknowledge the problem at
all. American politics was starting to
feel like a stagnant, dying system that
was allowing the country to fall apart
while the citizens suffered. But the
solution Peter Teal came up with was a
whole other problem. But I must confess
that over the last two decades, I have
changed radically on the question of how
to achieve these goals. Most
importantly, I no longer believe that
freedom and democracy are compatible.
But basically, Peter Thiel was starting
to feel like he had done as much as he
possibly could for the libertarian goal
of freedom. And for the rest of it, the
democratic system was starting to get in
his way. And honestly, a lot of this
article is kind of incoherent. But
there's one section in particular that
really reveals what Peter Teal was
thinking at the time. It says, "Since
1920, the vast increase in welfare
beneficiaries and the extension of the
franchise to women, two constituencies
that are notoriously tough for
libertarians, have rendered the notion
of capitalist democracy into an
oxymoron." Essentially, he's writing
that capitalism is not popular with the
average person, the crowds, so to speak.
And so, as democracy grows, capitalists
will only be more restricted and
regulated. The more people who vote, the
more likely it is that wealth
redistribution will grow as well. As a
libertarian capitalist, that's not the
world Peter Teal wants to live in.
Basically, democracy and the concerns of
the masses is constraining his ability,
his liberty and freedom to build the
future of entrepreneurship and
capitalism. And so, his answer is that
he writes, "The fate of our world may
depend on the effort of a single person
who builds or propagates the machinery
of freedom to make the world safe for
capitalism." And I kind of get what he
was saying, at least up until this
point. I think we all understand that
our political system today is corrupt.
It's inefficient and doesn't really
serve people. And in a lot of ways, we
aren't actually free. But where Peter
Teal deviates is that when he realized
he couldn't make the world more free,
his first thought was, at least he could
be the one in control. I mean, this
literally says the fate of the world
might depend on a single person who
builds the machinery of freedom to make
the world safe for capitalism.
And so, after years of trying to create
freedom by building tech, Peter Teal
felt pretty defeated. And understandably
so, PayPal never became the libertarian
dream it was meant to be because of
regulation and laws. Terror attacks had
brought about an increase in
surveillance over private citizens. And
then a huge recession increased
government spending and taxes and
regulation more than ever before. But
this is also where Palanteer finally
finds its purpose to help Peter Teal
grab power and control. Because if the
systems weren't going to function, at
least he could be the one behind the
wheel.
But Palanteer was only one small piece
of the puzzle. Throughout the 2010s,
Peter Teal's investment career in
general took a pretty sharp turn. Teal's
Founders Fund would also invest $1
billion, the biggest investment they had
ever made, in Anderil Industries, a
company making AI powered surveillance
towers for border protection and
military use, among other futuristic
defense technology. He would also invest
in and join the board of multiple
European startups focused on attack
drones and remote warfare. When Peter
Teal wrote in 2009 that we are in a
deadly race between politics and
technology, I don't think him going and
becoming a merchant of death is what
most people would have expected. But
sure enough, he had slowly transitioned
from investing in apps for banking and
social media and instead turned towards
weapons of war and surveillance, doing
business not with international
customers searching for freedom via the
internet, but instead his client was now
the government. the very same government
that he had once sought to build an
escape ladder away from. And so when you
combine all this together, you're
looking at a pretty different person
than who Peter Teal used to be. His work
was no longer about expanding people's
collective liberties as much as
possible. Instead, now by investing in
weapons, surveillance, and war, he's
only making the government stronger.
Freedom for all was openly no longer the
end goal. Now, it was about protecting
the very same institutions he had once
dreamed of getting rid of. Today, it's
the end of 2025 and Palanteer's value
has skyrocketed with the company now
being worth well over $400 billion. At
the same time, though, the company is
more heavily criticized than it ever has
been, even more than enabling
potentially questionable police tactics
in American cities. Palanteer has
reached a sky-high valuation by
achieving widespread adoption around the
world within the US federal government
and hold contracts with every branch of
the military and every single
three-letter security agency. The FBI,
CIA, DHS, the Marines, the Air Force,
all of these departments are now relying
on Palunteer to more accurately spy on
their targets. And reporting from leaked
NSA documents revealed that Palunteer
software is also now used to sift
through massive amounts of X key score
data, essentially being able to track
almost everything that typical users do
on the internet. One UK intelligence
review warned that Palunteer able to
view the world's internet traffic
completely at will. In Israel, Palanteer
controversially partnered with the IDF
to use AI targeting for adversaries.
although the accuracy of their work was
highly questioned after over 200 aid
workers were killed in Gaza in just a
few months in 2024.
>> So what do you think about the use of
artificial intelligence or lavender by
the IDF in identifying Hamas targets?
Um, look, I I'm not I'm not um, you
know, you know, without without
um going into all the, you know, I I'm
not on top of all the details of what's
going on in Israel because my my bias is
to defer to Israel.
>> Law advocates in the UK have written
that Palunteer is able to create a 360
profile of individuals and carry out
indiscriminate mass surveillance. Most
recently in 2024, they pitched creating
an initiative that would link IRS,
social security, and visa data all in
one system, creating a massive database
of information about the American people
that could be accessed at will by any
federal agency. Today, Palanteer is also
being used in the US to help ICE carry
out deportations with a software
platform called Immigration OS that
tracks immigrants. But whatever it's
being used for, the end result is that
Palunteer is essentially a privatized
intelligence agency. And when you
combine the size of all the agencies
they partner with, they're probably the
most powerful one in the world alone.
Working with nearly every government
agency you could imagine, Palanteer's
tools give power to cops, spies, and the
military to, yes, predict danger. But
behind the scenes, they're slowly
shifting away the power of surveillance
into completely private hands with no
democratic control over who gets flagged
or why or how to fight back. This type
of surveillance is a violation of
personal liberty by almost any
definition you could think of. It goes
against almost every value we've come to
expect and understand as Americans.
Palunteer is literally a magic crystal
ball watching all of us all the time and
it was created by Peter Teal. And part
of the reason why it got that big at all
is because 10 years ago, Peter Teal
bought the president of the United
States. On July 21st, 2016, Peter Teal
took the stage at the Republican
National Convention in Cleveland and
said,
>> "I am proud to be gay. I am proud to be
a Republican, but most of all, I am
proud to be an American.
>> He would follow it up by saying, "Nobody
in this race is honest except Donald
Trump." A statement that was followed by
thunderous applause and from him a
smirk. Peter Teal had obviously up until
this moment spent his political energy
almost exclusively on futile libertarian
causes as a big donor to Ron Paul in
2008 and 2012.
>> More than $2.5 million to Ron Paul. Is
that not I mean in practical terms just
flushing money down the drain?
>> Well, it's uh flushing money down the
drain if you uh if you're hoping to uh
to achieve power. I think it's an
investment in uh the future. I think the
the future of of this country will be
more libertarian.
>> But Donald Trump was not a libertarian.
Trump's promise was something else
entirely. His politics were built on a
feverish populism that promised
rebellion against the elites, a return
to greatness across the nation and a new
era of prosperity for all, especially
the downtrodden working class that felt
abandoned and disenfranchised after the
promised recovery from the 2008
financial crisis never came. Trump's
Democratic opponent, Hillary Clinton,
came off as profoundly fake and
impersonal. Another sorted reminder of
the corrupt political machine spewing
the same old [__]
>> Pokemon go to the polls. Trump himself
though was electric.
>> Awfully good that someone with the
temperament of Donald Trump is not in
charge of the law in our country.
>> Yeah. Because you'd be in jail.
>> Because when someone showed up promising
to smash the machine, it didn't matter
who it was. It sounded like the first
honest sentence that had been uttered in
a century.
>> I had a lot of people and one guy who
was seriously obese.
He complained when I mentioned that food
stamps, we have a lot of people on food
stamps. and the guy went crazy and they
said that wasn't politically correct.
Who cares? We all have a weight problem.
>> But when it came to the vast majority of
people in tech, Trump was extremely
unpopular because he wasn't just raw.
Millions of people saw him as downright
disgusting. His campaign was built on
controversy, insults, scandals, threats.
>> This guy, I don't know what I said. Uh,
I don't remember. He's going like, I
don't remember. I Oh, maybe that's what
I said. and an attitude considered by
many to be downright disrespectful to
the office of the presidency, even by
fellow Republicans.
>> Donald Trump's candidacy is a cancer on
conservatism.
>> What about Marco Rubio?
>> I think he's highly overrated. I don't
think that the way he's behaved over the
last few weeks is either dignified or
worthy of the office that he seeks. And
by the way, I have much better hair than
he does. Okay.
>> In April of 2016, Mark Zuckerberg gave a
speech condemning politicians calling
for the building of walls. I hear
fearful voices calling for building
walls and for slowing immigration.
Instead of building walls, build
bridges. And instead of dividing people,
we can help bring people together.
>> Tim Cook notably declined to support the
2016 RNC. Elon Musk went on record
saying that Trump was probably not the
right guy, while Jeff Bezos openly said
he seemed unfit for office.
>> Yeah. A year ago, you blogged that you
didn't have very strong feelings about
the election, but that you hoped Trump
would not get the nomination. Do you
essentially feel the same way about his
victory to the White House?
>> Well, I I feel a a bit stronger that
probably he's he's not the right guy. Um
he he just doesn't seem
he doesn't seem to have the sort of
character that reflects well in the
United States. It's just just I don't
know just no.
>> Peter Teal endorsing Donald Trump was so
controversial that there was actually a
call for him to be removed from the
board at Facebook because of his
political views. But the question that
keeps coming back is why? What made
Peter Thiel go down this road and become
someone else entirely? Why are his
investments, his companies, and his
beliefs unrecognizable from what they
were 25 years ago? How did he drift so
far from these goals of personal freedom
and individual liberty? and what is he
even trying to achieve? But again, he
wasn't just doing it to do it. His
contrarianism, as always, had a motive.
In 2011, Peter Thiel had said in an
interview that the world's mood of
emergency following the financial crisis
had him feeling hopeful. He said that
the failure of the establishment was too
obvious to ignore and an opportunity for
something completely new to take over
was growing. And so after Peter Thiel
steps out on the stage to endorse Donald
Trump at the RNC, it didn't take long
for the media to put a couple pieces
together and realize that Peter Teal may
not necessarily be a fan of Donald Trump
at all, but rather he maybe saw his
feverish and fanatical style as a
possible means to an end. And so when
you combine that with his writings that
he believed democracy should be replaced
with a system friendlier to capitalism,
it became kind of easy to see how Peter
Teal probably wasn't that concerned with
Trump's promise to bring coal back to
Western Pennsylvania. Maybe more so, he
was hoping that Trump might help achieve
his openly stated goal of shrinking
democracy to make more room for
capitalism. Trump was a candidate known
for racist tirades, a candidate that
promised to increase deportations, to
act with hostility towards the
democratic masses that Peter Teal had
long expressed maybe need to be thrown
to the side so he can make more money.
Even back in 2016, there are articles
you can find where people were starting
to connect the dots between Peter Teal's
newfound appreciation for the Republican
party and his statements about the end
of democracy. Trump gives Peter Teal a
way to fulfill his long-held ambition of
saving capitalism from democracy. And
Peter Teal's preferred political future
isn't hard to picture. The government
shoulders the research costs for
capitalists, but makes no demands and
sets no conditions. An authoritarian
leader uses racial anger to set one
portion of the population against
another and cracks down on those he sees
as alien or illegitimate. The state
becomes even more responsive to the
needs of capitalists and even less
responsive to the needs of workers and
citizens. What Peter Thiel calls the
oxymoron of capitalist democracy is
resolved by jettisoning democracy. It's
easy for liberals to dismiss Peter Teal
as a comic book villain, but this
caricature obscures the fact that Peter
Teal is a sophisticated thinker and a
perceptive one. His central observation
that American capitalism is facing a
crisis is unquestionably correct. From
1920 to 1970, real per capita GDP grew
by a staggering 2.5% a year on average.
From 1970 to 2014, it slowed
considerably to 1.7%. And the slowdown
in labor productivity has been even
starker. Over the long term, stagnation
doesn't just threaten capitalism by
limiting growth. It also runs the risk
of turning people against capitalism as
their wages and living standards
deteriorate. This is already happening
as the popularity of Bernie Sanders
campaign made clear. A Trumpist state
could do much to soothe the crisis of
capitalism. It could pour public dollars
into discovering the next lucrative
technology for the private sector while
holding the line against the
redistributive clamor of a rising
millennial majority. Basically, it
seemed clear to pretty much everybody
that Peter Thiel was hoping that Donald
Trump would divide America so much that
no one would be able to agree on whether
or not you should kind of dismantle
capitalism in the sense that Peter Teal
wanted it unrestricted, able to innovate
whatever he wants with absolutely no
care for the greater good of the common
people. And his bet, at least that Trump
would be elected, paid off. And not only
that, but by investing in Trump at a
moment when absolutely nobody else would
even stand in a room with the president,
Peter Teal had bought himself an
unmatched level of influence, thanks to
the same foresight he had always had
throughout his career. And now he was
going to create a politician from
scratch, the same way that he had spent
the first half of his career investing
in and guiding companies. Teal had been
investing in people for a long time as
well. He once famously paid a bunch of
undergrads $200,000 each to drop out of
college and start their own companies.
And it was famously easy for students
who contributed to the Stanford Review
during their time at Stanford to find
work at his companies after graduation.
Even more than that, his list of mentees
includes huge names like Sam Alman and
more. But in 2011, he started out on the
journey to create a politician. In the
spring of 2011, Peter Teal gave a talk
at Yale Law School where he argued that
there was a big bubble forming in
America, but it wasn't anything related
to business or financial markets.
Instead, it was higher education. He
would talk about prestigious degrees
having little purpose besides to funnel
people into unfulfilling bureaucratic
jobs that have little to nothing to do
with genuine innovation. And one person
who attended that talk was JD Vance, a
27-year-old former military journalist
who was now pursuing a law degree at
Yale. The story goes that the speech had
such an effect on him that he realized
he didn't want to practice law as a
career, but instead do something much
more impactful with his life. And so a
couple years later, after he had
practiced law for about a year, JD Vance
follows in Peter Teal's footsteps and
goes to work in Silicon Valley in
venture capital. But even from there
though, he would only grow further. In
2016, he releases a book about his
impoverished childhood in Ohio. And the
perspective of someone who was both from
the poorest part of the country and
successful in the world of tech quickly
became the subject of national interest.
So you combine all that, the
hopelessness, the despair, the cynicism
about the future, the childhood trauma,
the low social capital, and you begin to
understand why me at the age of 14 was
ready to become just another statistic,
another kid who failed to beat the odds.
And while his book was often described
as an explanation of the Trump
phenomenon,
>> you understand Trump supporters more
than most people do, especially the
white working-class we were talking
about who overwhelmingly voted for him.
You also wrote about your and their
struggles in your book,
>> um, that the so-called coastal media
didn't know a whole lot about, and
hopefully my book shed a good light on
those folks and help people understand
why they were struggling and why they
were concerned about their futures.
Vance himself would vocally speak out
against Trump as a self-described never
Trumper.
>> I'm a never Trump guy. I never liked
him.
>> He once said, "Trump is cultural
heroine. He makes some people feel
better for a bit, but he cannot fix what
hils them." He would even say that Trump
was leading the white working class to a
very dark place and that he might become
America's Hitler if left unchecked.
>> Trump is a really bad candidate and
frankly, I think, a really bad person.
But in 2020, JD Vance moved back to his
home state of Ohio. Far from the career
in media and venture capital he had been
building for the past decade, but very
close to a possible entry into a
political career at home. And sure
enough, not long after, he announced a
run for senator. At that moment, JD
Vance was probably one of the last
people Donald Trump ever would have
endorsed. But JD Vance wasn't really
running alone. He had an advantage that
most candidates couldn't even dream of.
Because as it turns out, JD Vance's
career wasn't just inspired by Peter
Teal. In fact, it was paid for by him.
The venture capital companies that Vance
had worked at after school were Peter
Teal's companies. And JD Vance's
political campaign was also paid for
almost entirely by Peter Teal, who spent
$15 million, more than Vance's entire
campaign raised on its own, on a super
PAC that ran video ads supporting JD
Vance. His only problem was that he had
left behind a long track record of
detailed critiques of Donald Trump's
politics just a couple years before he
was trying to get into the Republican
party. But in reality, again, that
wasn't really going to be a problem at
all. After all, Peter Teal was Trump's
most prominent ally in Silicon Valley
and JD Vance's biggest donor. And so,
with Peter Teal's money and network
clearing the path to get a Trump
endorsement after insulting him in years
past, it was an obvious choice for a
former Never Trumper to rebrand as MAGA.
Ultimately, there was no way he was
going to win without it. And so Peter
Teal didn't just influence JD Vance's
political career, he created it. If JD
Vance hadn't been able to get Trump's
endorsement, which he got through Peter
Teal, he never would have entered the
Senate, and he obviously wouldn't have
become vice president less than 2 years
later. There's a lot to be said about J.
D. Vance having completely switched his
political ideals in exchange for power
and influence. But somehow that really
isn't even the part that matters. What
matters is that Peter Teal was able to
buy his friend a seat just a heartbeat
away from the presidency. He had the
support of billionaire Peter Teal, but
that still wasn't enough. The Trump
endorsement lifted him out of the pack,
put him past Josh Mandel, the
conservative state treasurer, state
senator Matt Dolan, who's more moderate
on the Republican side, and that
cemented the victory for JD Vance. It
>> during an interview with The Atlantic
about a year and a half ago, Teal would
reveal that after declining a request
for another $10 million campaign
donation from Donald Trump, it would
only be a few weeks before he heard that
Donald Trump had called him a [__]
scumbag while on the phone with another
politician that Teal was connected to.
And this is something that I think a lot
of people don't know. Peter Teal has
been saying for about the last year and
a half that he is completely done with
politics forever after being massively
disappointed with the Trump
administration not being able to reach
almost any of their lofty goals. Even
after being branded as a conservative
kingmaker by the media for helping build
support for Donald Trump and ostensibly
being the whole reason why JD Van has a
political career at all, he is no longer
interested in American democracy,
period. It's a strangely quiet and
almost disappointing end for a political
career that was once kind of blatantly
focused on upsetting the order of our
political system entirely. But in
reality, Peter Thiel's quote unquote
losing interest in politics may not be
as much of a disappointed surrender as
he makes it seem. Because Peter Teal has
essentially already completed his goals
that he set out to achieve in terms of
making democracy safe for capitalism 15
years ago. The vice president of the US,
the top pick to be the next president of
America, is one of his closest allies in
political philosophy. But even more than
that, Palunteer has already achieved
Peter Thiel's goals of leaprogging the
government entirely by creating a
private surveillance state that has
access to immensely important
information from almost every military
and intelligence agency in the Western
world. If that isn't the definition of
going around the government to seize
power for yourself, I don't know what
would be. But that also doesn't mean
that Peter Teal is finished with trying
to outright replace democracy
altogether, either. Because what Peter
Thiel has turned his attention to next
is comparatively even crazier than any
idea he ever tried to build before. For
a couple of years now, Peter Teal has
been traveling around the world to give
talks about how he relates Christian
themes and concerns to current global
events, and his main focus has been the
Antichrist, the bringer of end times,
and how he sees it manifesting around
him. While no video cameras are allowed,
and attendees have to promise that
they'll keep the lectures strictly off
the record, one recent series of
Antichrist talks that Teal hosted in San
Francisco was particularly publicized
and analyzed. Peter Teal believes that
the Armageddon will be ushered in by an
antichrist type figure who cultivates a
fear of existential threats such as
climate change, AI, and nuclear war to
amass inordinate power. The idea is that
this figure will convince people to do
everything they can to avoid something
like a third world war, including
accepting a one world order charged with
protecting everyone from the apocalypse
that implements a complete restriction
of technological progress. In Peter
Teal's mind, this is already happening.
He literally says that international
financial bodies, you know, stuff that
makes it more difficult for people to
shelter their wealth in tax havens are
one sign that the antichrist may be
amassing power and hastening Armageddon.
He said it's become quite difficult to
hide one's money. Basically, Peter Teal
has been arguing that progressive ideas
are going to usher in the end of the
world, and he has a million arguments to
prove it. He often mentions that the
basis of this belief comes from none
other than Nazi political theorist Carl
Schmidt. Sometimes he mentions that he
warns other billionaires not to donate
their money to charity because of how
charity has become a ploy on the part of
antichrist-like figures who seek to take
billionaires fortunes and use it for the
advancement of nefarious goals. He says,
"I told Elon Musk not to give Bill Gates
his fortune. But the one thing that Teal
doesn't address in his long, sweaty
rambling speeches is that from another
point of view, he himself could also be
seen as the Antichrist according to some
Christian texts and beliefs. Basically,
Peter Teal argues that stuff like the
one world government, charity, and
environmental protection are stopping us
from moving towards true technological
innovation and actually building a
better world. But at the same time, he
ignores what kind of future will be
ushered in by the technology he builds.
Peter Teal has spent decades investing
in tools that are used to divide nations
and cultures, spy on citizens, funnel
money from the bottom to the top, and
overall, I would argue that he's helped
create a more violent and less stable
social order around the world. Peter
Thiel and people like him have
experienced nothing but wealth beyond
imagination, while the rest of the world
has suffered and become less stable and
prosperous at the same time. And so, the
problem is that most of Peter Thiel's
discussion of the Antichrist is
ultimately incoherent. I think what he's
doing is trying to create a framework
that justifies his own disdain for
things that are against his personal
financial interest. His positions are
pretty clearly anti-humanity. And if you
look at it for too long, it starts to
look just downright evil. But Peter Teal
himself has this personal arc that could
be described as antichrist. In the last
20 years, he went from a libertarian who
wanted to make technology that creates
freedom. He now believes somehow two
decades later that democracy is useless
and needs to be replaced with monarchy.
I think in the end though, what makes
Peter Teal scary isn't really his ideas
because a lot of the time they just kind
of conflict and collapse on themselves.
He eventually realizes that he can't
necessarily turn the president into a
king that will let him spend $und00
billion on a floating island in the
ocean instead of paying taxes. And so
what's really concerning is the man
behind these ideas that believes he's on
a divine mission to save civilization
from itself. Because when you strip away
the libertarianism, the authoritarian
capitalism, the theology that doesn't
really make sense, I think what you find
underneath is a very strange human
being. There are a lot of reasons why
people call Peter Teal a contrarian. I
mean, the name of his biography is
literally the contrarian. Because if
Peter Thiel's politics sound insane, his
personal life is even stranger. There
are many other details about Peter
Teal's personal life that make him much
harder to understand than any other
Silicon Valley billionaire. And I think
while these details about his personal
life do paint a confusing picture, they
also make one thing very clear. Behind
all the masks, the concepts, the
philosophies, the motives, Peter Teal is
simply a very greedy, self-interested
individual who will grab on to any
philosophy or idea he can to justify his
own evil. He was outed as gay in 2007 by
an online tabloid that he would later
help push into bankruptcy by funding
lawsuits against them. Nowadays though,
he's been married for about 8 years, and
he has a couple of kids with a husband
who spent most of his career working at
Blackstone. But even his personal life
isn't free of controversy. There's a
story from 2023 that involves Peter
Teal's secret relationship with Jeff
Thomas that played out in the years
prior. Jeff Thomas was essentially an
Instagram influencer. And according to
tabloids, he and Peter Thiel were in an
open secret relationship where Peter
Thiel was letting him live in a $10
million mansion in Hollywood, gave him a
supercar, and all this great stuff. But
at the same time, it was kept completely
secret from his husband. It wasn't a
typical relationship. Jeff Thomas
described himself as being in a kept
situation that made him uncomfortable.
He said it was stressful. He wanted me
to get the nicest car, the nicest house.
He wanted to kind of show his power, to
show that he had me in a dollhouse. It's
not like I was his boyfriend. I was just
kind of his friend that was there for
him when he needed for whatever he
needed. But Thomas had gone on record in
2022 saying that he was trying to push
Teal away from being involved in the
culture war and donating to Republican
politicians. He had even said that he
was part of the reason why Teal didn't
back Trump during the 2020 election,
showing him that it was the wrong thing
to do. But early in 2023, some tabloids
would report that he had crashed a New
Year's party at Peter Teal's house to
confront him and his husband once and
for all about Teal's increasingly
aggressive political causes. But then,
just a few weeks later, Jeff Thomas was
found dead, having fallen from the
window of a high-rise apartment building
in Bickl, Miami. While his death was
investigated as a suicide, it would also
become the subject of speculation online
after people close to him reported that
he wasn't depressed and couldn't have
been happier or more normal in the weeks
leading up to his passing with lots of
future plans and ideas taking shape.
Whether Jeff Thomas' death was an
accident, a tragedy, or something
darker, what it revealed was that the
empire Peter Teal built stops at nothing
in consuming everything around him.
Everyone in his orbit eventually becomes
a piece of his plans, partners,
proteges, even lovers. And that's what
kind of makes understanding Peter Teal
pretty difficult, but also not at all.
Because behind every ideology, every
donation, moral panic, apocalyptic
lecture, there's always the same ugly
truth. His only goal is control. When
you take away the philosophy, the
theology, the contrarian mask, what's
left isn't a mysterious thinker. It's a
man who's so terrified of losing control
that he'd rather destroy the world than
share it. And that's where Peter Teal's
story stops being personal and becomes
universal. Because Peter Teal is a
symptom of a society that worships
money, power, and control above all
else. And that's what brings us to the
ultimate question. What happens when
those instincts stop belonging to just
one billionaire and start defining the
entire direction of civilization?
I think Peter Teal and I do agree on one
very important thing that the world as
we know it is changing drastically and
it's happening right before our eyes.
The systems that prior generations took
for granted are being pushed to the
brink. Our institutions are crumbling.
Advertising and surveillance and fake
culture wars fill our minds. Public
trust and belief in the government is at
an all-time low. The economy our parents
grew up with no longer seems to exist.
And the future isn't coming fast enough
to feel like we're going to make it out
of this alive. It really does feel like
the neoliberal democratic political
order has failed. We're not in a golden
age of American history by any
measurement, maybe except uh
constructing AI data centers. Feels like
innovation has been forgotten in favor
of consumerism while the poor get poorer
and the rich get richer. But I think
where Peter Teal and I would disagree is
the separation of church and state. The
separation of church and state is one of
the foundations of classical liberalism.
This is one of the main tenets of
political order that Curtis Yarvin and
Nickland want to get rid of. And maybe
it's one that they don't often address,
but this is one of the foundations of
Western civilization as we know it right
now. And whether you're religious or
not, which I personally am, I don't
think any of us ever want anyone with my
beliefs or anyone else's to use those
beliefs as the basis for our government.
I don't care if it's my personal pastor
or my priest or the pope or Jesus
himself. I would not want my spiritual
leader to become my political leader.
It's the perfect setup for abuse, bias,
control, and manipulation. And when you
open that door, every law, every policy,
and every punishment becomes dangerous.
It stops being about what's right, and
it becomes about what's right for
whoever is in power. And we know what
happens after that. History is full of
people who were silenced or worse in the
name of divine authority. We lost
hundreds of years of civilizational
progress because of people wielding
divine authority as a political weapon.
And again, we've known this for
centuries. Hundreds of years ago, people
sailed across oceans and were imprisoned
and even died to live in a world where
the government wouldn't determine their
religious freedom. In 1802, Thomas
Jefferson wrote the letter to the
Danbury Baptists. And he said,
"Believing with you that religion is a
matter which lies solely between man and
God, that he owes account to none for
his faith or for his worship, that the
legitimate powers of government reach
actions only and not opinions." I
contemplate with sovereign reverence
that act of the whole American people
which declared that their legislature
should make no law respecting an
establishment of religion or prohibiting
the free exercise thereof, thus building
a wall of separation between church and
state. Let's read that again. He said,
"I contemplate with sovereign reverence
that act of the whole American people
which declared that their legislature
should make no law respecting an
establishment of religion or prohibiting
the free exercise thereof, thus building
a wall of separation between church and
state. For over 200 years now, we have
stayed on that course of a separation
between church and state as much as we
can. And there have been a lot of
benefits to living in a secular nation.
I think what we're seeing right now
makes it pretty clear that even if we
remove church, that a lot of people
still have the instinct, the desire to
be drawn towards belief systems that
mirror religion, even if it doesn't
involve church in the traditional sense.
For many people, that's a puritanical
leftist politics. For other people, it's
a reactionary desire to return to a
bygone past that never existed to begin
with. But my point being is that for
some people, the all-encompassing god
right now is just money, wealth, and
capital. Today, the richest 400 people
in America have more wealth than the
entire bottom 50% of the country. And if
you think it would be bad to live in a
society where the church decides what
you are and aren't allowed to do as a
private citizen, you probably shouldn't
want to live in a society run by
billionaires either. The track record of
billionaires, it shows that they don't
really care who on earth has to suffer,
die, overdose, or god knows what else,
as long as they can continue enriching
themselves indefinitely. It's pretty
hard to argue that our society isn't in
decline. I think Peter Teal and I both
agree on that. It's just that his
solution seems to involve making it
worse for everyone except himself. And
the problem with that is that the
worship of capital that we're seeing
right now is so complete that we've sold
our entire society to the highest bidder
so they can make themselves richer
without caring that it turns the rest of
the world into a hopeless slum. Social
media was one of the biggest inventions
of our century and right now it's being
used to manipulate elections. Devices
and algorithms can be used as trackers.
information has been consolidated into
the hands of a select few. At this
point, social media isn't much more than
a tool for division and manipulation.
It's been a contributing factor to so
many of our contemporary societal
issues. And at the same time, the
richest people in the world are allowing
that, and they continue to allow it for
the sake of their own gain. Our social
order and our sense of community has
practically been destroyed just so a
small percentage of men could get rich
from it. Even right now, tech CEOs are
colluding with Republican politicians to
prevent regulation on the AI technology
that threatens almost every single
corner of the American economy. But it
goes even deeper than that. The Rust
Belt was once a beautiful center of
manufacturing and innovation, and it's
been turned into an apocalyptic
wasteland for better corporate profit
margins. Because for the people that
make these decisions, for the people who
control capital, money is God, and
humanity is an afterthought. the abuses,
the crimes against humanity. These
things that are happening as a result of
capitalism as a religion, they're
reminiscent of the abuses that the
church carried out when it had control
over European politics for hundreds of
years. We are currently, literally going
backwards so a small group of people can
consolidate power over society into
their own hands. I feel like the most
prolific conversations about what a
civic religion looks like usually relate
to identity politics. You know, I mean,
it's pretty much a system of beliefs
that comes with a built-in moral law,
heresies, this framework for meaning and
belonging without God. And I think
people love saying this about the trans
community and gay people, furries,
leftists, communists. If you think
that's bad, imagine if the civic
religion of greed and millionaires and
billionaires became the dominant
political player in our country. This
country full of people struggling to get
by being run by the same people who
created those conditions in the first
place. It's kind of already happening.
Billionaires are the same people who
crashed the housing market in 2008 and
only walked away richer than ever, while
millions of Americans lost their homes,
savings, and dignity. Between 2008 and
2010, there were an extra 20,000
suicides in America. There was a
financial crisis that led to 20,000
people dying while at the same time,
billionaires came out richer than ever.
Billionaires are the same class of
people who sold out high-paying factory
jobs to China, leaving middle America
looking more like a ghost town than the
center of the richest country on Earth.
If you want to see what a society run by
billionaires would look like, go to the
south side of Chicago or St. Louis,
Missouri or Baltimore or Detroit or
Cleveland or Philly or Buffalo or
Youngtown or Milwaukee or the thousands
of small towns where everyday life
ceased to exist. That's what it looks
like when an entire nation worth of
people is cast away and discarded
because the people on top figured out
they could get the work done more
efficiently somewhere else. This is what
it looks like when the money starts
flowing from the bottom to the top and
not the other way around. It's the same
thing that's happening with the
surveillance and the division brought
about by the uncontrolled growth of tech
companies in the last decade and a half.
The fabric of our society is coming
apart at the seams. And beyond a small
group of people making billions from it,
we have very little to show for what we
lost. What I'm trying to say is that
yeah, maybe worshiping democracy hasn't
created a perfect world, but I think we
also know what it would look like if
society started to worship money and
wealth above everything else. And I
think by all accounts and evidence it
would be much much worse. And my point
in saying all of this is that this is
why following the political ideals of a
billionaire is outright ridiculous. When
you look at the long arc, the 30-year
arc of Peter Teal's career, the basis of
his beliefs becomes pretty clear. He
starts off as libertarian technologist
that wants to create technological
bridges to connect people and ideas in a
way that was never possible before the
internet. He wanted to build a
libertarian future where freedom and
liberty were the highest goals of all.
At first, he made a platform where
anyone in the world could send money to
anyone else. It was crypto before crypto
existed. After that, he would spend more
than a decade investing in every
libertarian idea he could find.
Facebook, Airbnb, Lyft, SpaceX, all
these beautiful companies that aimed to
connect people and push humanity forward
into a more free future for all. But
after he became disenchanted in his
libertarian goals following the
government bailouts in 2008, he would
make it his mission to instead take
control for himself. Even if it meant
destroying democracy and representation
for the people, he would realize that
what they had built wasn't a libertarian
utopia at all, but a series of systems
that could be used to observe,
manipulate, and control humanity
worldwide. And suddenly his libertarian
beliefs started to take a backseat to
the potential for power that was laid
out in front of him. Even as far back as
2004, Peter Teal wrote that a direct
path forward is prevented by America's
constitutional machinery. But he said,
"Still though, there are more
possibilities for action than first
appear." He said, "Instead of the United
Nations filled with interminable and
inconclusive parliamentary debates that
resemble Shakespearean tales told by
idiots, we should consider the secret
coordination of the world's intelligence
services as the divisive path to a truly
global PAX Americana." This surveillance
super system, Teal wrote, could act as a
political framework that operates
outside the checks and balances of
representative democracy as described in
high school textbooks. He didn't like
the idea of big government and control
over people until he realized that he
had become so rich and powerful that
maybe he could be the one in control. At
that point, he changes his mind. And
eventually, Peter Teal would even go so
far as to influence and back an unstable
populist president that he believed
might help get him closer to total
domination so he could focus on
innovation, power, and money by any
means. But when even that didn't work
out how he wanted it to, he instead
begins to move on towards painting
leftism as a product of Satan, telling
the story that only again unrestrained
capitalism would be enough to save
humanity
>> of people even if you're not related to
them. That's it. It's good to act like
the good Samaritan and uh to take care
of people not just in your family or
tribe or or country.
>> And while Peter Teal has no doubt put in
an immense amount of effort and
intellectual power and money to justify
what he believes building on ideas on
top of ideas on top of ideas. Uh but
then if you if you force everyone to be
a good Samaritan and you force a
borderless world that's uh that that see
that's it's some it's somehow adjacent
somehow it's an intensification but it's
uh it's somehow also very much the
opposite.
>> When you turn it upside down you realize
that it was never really as complicated
as it seems. For all this talk of the
Antichrist, the future of humanity, the
advancement of freedom and liberty, when
you zoom out, it becomes pretty clear
that Peter Teal's guiding motive above
all else and ever since the beginning
has been money. Every explanation for
why his love of money is good for the
rest of us is nothing but a way of
rationalizing what truly motivates him,
greed. Peter Tail doesn't and never has
had a coherent vision of the world.
Mostly what he does have is a worship of
money so strong that he'll move any
mountain to justify it. and his desire
to control more and accumulate more
eventually changed the core of who he
always was in the process of
rationalizing the accumulation of more
money and power. Peter Thiel would
literally rather return to a medieval
social order and government than stop
accumulating money. He would turn
everyone in the world into a peasant
just so he can be king.
It's not easy to understand who exactly
Peter Teal is. But at the same time,
it's not hard either. When you first
look at him, there's this web of
companies and ideas and philosophies and
Lord of the Rings references. He gives
lectures on the Antichrist. He
references obscure philosophers. He
makes himself out to be this
intellectual searching for a better way
forward. But at the same time, he's not
that good at hiding his true motives. He
spent hundreds of millions of dollars
enriching himself with investments in
military technology. He preaches freedom
while building platforms that only serve
to increase his control over the world.
There was actually a recent interview
where he was confronted outright for his
hypocrisy and being obsessed with this
idea of the leftist antichrist while he
himself is an investor and builder in
weapons of war, killing and destruction.
Seems to me that when you tell me a
story
>> about the Antichrist coming to power and
using the fear of technological change
to sort of impose order on the world, I
feel like that antichrist would be maybe
be using the tools
>> that you that you were that you were
building, right? Like wouldn't the
antichrist be like, great, you know,
we're not going to have any more
technological progress, but I really
like what Palanteer has done so far. And
the craziest part of that is that Peter
Teal had no answer for himself. When
this interviewer finally confronted him
with his hypocrisy, he completely
folded. He didn't seem like a mysterious
tech genius with philosophies and
motives beyond our comprehension. He
looked like a man so blinded by greed
that he forgot to come up with a good
alibi for why he wants to own the entire
world.
Uh there all look there there are all
these different
scenario. I obviously don't think that
that's what I'm doing.
But again uh there there are these
different gradations of of this we can
describe. But
after all this entrepreneurship,
innovation, the mental effort required
to build his empire and his
philosophies, he sat there in front of
the camera blankly, red-faced,
stuttering, and sweating. He was
seemingly unable to understand what he
was even being asked. And I think that
moment gave away what Peter Teal really
is. a greedy, selfish person who wants
to own the world and will invent any
fantasy he can possibly think of to
justify it. But it doesn't really matter
what I say theoretically about church
and state and right and wrong because
right now Peter Teal and people like him
are winning. Peter Teal has two of his
guys in the White House. The American
oligarchs have so much control and
influence over our society that in some
ways I'm kind of scared to even publish
this video. But again, I think what we
can agree with the billionaires about is
that a great reckoning of society is
coming. And in a lot of ways, it's
needed. I completely agree with Peter
Teal that society could be described as
stagnant and that there are existential
threats to our civilization and our
freedom coming down the road. And maybe
you can argue that that change needs to
be drastic in order to protect the
future of humanity. But categorically,
logically, in all ways, to have that
reckoning come from the top down in
terms of greed, money, and wealth, that
will bring nothing but the downfall of
humanity. Because the men at the top do
not serve humanity. They serve the god
of money. For them, wealth is the
ultimate end. And we've seen for decades
that they'll do anything to get closer
and closer. But closer to what? I can't
tell you. But neither could they.
Because with these kinds of pursuits,
there's no end on earth that would
satisfy them. There never was and there
never will be. You could say that maybe
that itself is the Antichrist. Or you
could call it what it is, a lie. A
complex, twisted, and disgusting
falsehood. A lie that needs to be called
out for what it is loudly while we still
can. I'm Philip. This is Volkgeist.
Thank you for watching.
[Music]